README for PSA-Crypto
=====================

The PSA-Crypto repository contains a reference implementation of the
[PSA Cryptography API](https://arm-software.github.io/psa-api) (version 1.0)
and its [unified driver interface](https://armmbed.github.io/mbed-crypto/psa).
This encompasses the on-going extensions to the PSA Cryptography API like
currently PAKE.

Configuration
-------------

The PSA-Crypto repository should build out of the box on most systems. Its
configuration is based on C preprocessor macros gathered in
`include/psa/crypto_config.h`. The C preprocessor macros or configuration
options are organized into four groups:
1. General configuration options, options that are not related to a specific
   part of the implementation of the PSA Cryptography API.
2. Configuration, using PSA_WANT_xxx macros as defined in psa-conditional-inclusion-c.md,
   of which parts of the PSA Cryptography API the user wishes to enable:
   cryptographic algorithms, key types, elliptic curves ...
3. Configuration of the PSA cryptography core as defined in psa-driver-interface.md
   which provides the key management, the generation of random numbers and the
   dispatch to drivers.
4. Configuration of the built-in implementation of the PSA driver interface as
   defined in psa-driver-interface.md: non-functional configuration related to
   performance/size trade-offs.

The file `include/psa/crypto_config.h` can be edited manually, or in a more
programmatic way using the Python 3 script `scripts/config.py` (use `--help`
for usage instructions).

Compiler options can be set using conventional environment variables such as
`CC` and `CFLAGS` when using the CMake build system (see below).

Documentation
-------------

Documentation for the PSA Cryptography API is available [on GitHub](https://arm-software.github.io/psa-api/crypto/).

To generate a local copy of the library documentation in HTML format:

1. Make sure that [Doxygen](http://www.doxygen.nl/) is installed.
1. Run `mkdir /path/to/build_dir && cd /path/to/build_dir`
1. Run `cmake /path/to/psa/crypto/source`
1. Run `make apidoc`
1. Browse `apidoc/index.html` or `apidoc/modules.html`.

Compiling
---------

The build system is CMake.
The CMake build system creates one library: libpsacrypto.

### Tool versions

You need the following tools to build the library from the main branch with the
provided CMake files. PSA-Crypto minimum tool version requirements are set
based on the versions shipped in the latest or penultimate (depending on the
release cadence) long-term support releases of major Linux distributions,
namely at time of writing: Ubuntu 20.04, RHEL 8, SLES 15 ...

* A C99 toolchain (compiler, linker, archiver). We actively test with GCC 5.4,
  Clang 3.8. More recent versions should work. Slightly older versions may work.
* Python 3.6.5 to generate the test code, and to generate sample programs in
  the main branch.
* Perl to run the tests, and to generate some source files in the main branch.
* CMake 3.16.3 or later.
* Doxygen 1.8.14 or later.

### Generated source files in the main branch

The source code of the PSA-Crypto repository includes some files that are
automatically generated by scripts and whose content depends only on the PSA
cryptography source, not on the platform or on the library configuration. These
files are not included in the main branch. This section explains how to generate
the missing files in the main branch.

The following tools are required:

* Python 3 and some Python packages, for some library source files, sample
  programs and test data. To install the necessary packages, run
  ```
  python3 -m pip install -r scripts/basic.requirements.txt
  ```
* A C compiler for the host platform, for some test data.

If you are cross-compiling, you must set the `CC` environment variable to a C
compiler for the host platform when generating the configuration-independent
files.

Any of the following methods are available to generate the
configuration-independent files:

* When not cross-compiling, CMake will generate the required files automatically.
* Run `tests/scripts/check-generated-files.sh -u` to generate all the
  configuration-independent files.

### CMake

In order to build the source using CMake in a separate directory (recommended),
just enter at the command line:

    mkdir /path/to/build_dir && cd /path/to/build_dir
    cmake /path/to/psa/crypto/source
    cmake --build .

In order to run the tests, enter:

    ctest

The test suites need Python to be built and Perl to be executed. If you don't
have one of these installed, you'll want to disable the test suites with:

    cmake -DENABLE_TESTING=Off /path/to/psa/crypto/source

To configure CMake for building shared libraries, use:

    cmake -DUSE_SHARED_PSA_CRYPTO_LIBRARY=On /path/to/psa/crypto/source

There are many different build modes available within the CMake buildsystem.
Most of them are available for gcc and clang, though some are compiler-specific:

- `Release`. This generates the default code without any unnecessary
  information in the binary files.
- `Debug`. This generates debug information and disables optimization of the code.
- `ASan`. This instruments the code with AddressSanitizer to check for memory
  errors. (This includes LeakSanitizer, with recent version of gcc and clang.)
  (With recent version of clang, this mode also instruments the code with
  UndefinedSanitizer to check for undefined behaviour.)
- `ASanDbg`. Same as ASan but slower, with debug information and better stack
  traces.
- `MemSan`. This instruments the code with MemorySanitizer to check for
  uninitialised memory reads. Experimental, needs recent clang on Linux/x86\_64.
- `MemSanDbg`. Same as MemSan but slower, with debug information, better stack
  traces and origin tracking.
- `Check`. This activates the compiler warnings that depend on optimization and
  treats all warnings as errors.

Switching build modes in CMake is simple. For debug mode, enter at the command
line:

    cmake -D CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug /path/to/psa/crypto/source

To list other available CMake options, use:

    cmake -LH

Note that, with CMake, you can't adjust the compiler or its flags after the
initial invocation of cmake. This means that `CC=your_cc make` and `make
CC=your_cc` will *not* work (similarly with `CFLAGS` and other variables).
These variables need to be adjusted when invoking cmake for the first time,
for example:

    CC=your_cc cmake /path/to/psa/crypto/source

If you already invoked cmake and want to change those settings, you need to
remove the build directory and create it again.

Note that it is possible to build in-place; this will however overwrite the
provided Makefiles (see `scripts/tmp_ignore_makefiles.sh` if you want to
prevent `git status` from showing them as modified). In order to do so, from
the PSA-Crypto source directory, use:

    cmake .
    make

If you want to change `CC` or `CFLAGS` afterwards, you will need to remove the
CMake cache. This can be done with the following command using GNU find:

    find . -iname '*cmake*' -not -name CMakeLists.txt -exec rm -rf {} +

You can now make the desired change:

    CC=your_cc cmake .
    make

Regarding variables, also note that if you set CFLAGS when invoking cmake,
your value of CFLAGS doesn't override the content provided by cmake (depending
on the build mode as seen above), it's merely prepended to it.

#### Consuming PSA-Crypto

The PSA-Crypto repository provides a package config file for consumption as a
dependency in other CMake projects. You can include PSA-Crypto CMake targets
yourself with:

    find_package(PSACrypto)

If prompted, set `PSACrypto_DIR` to `${YOUR_PSA_CRYPTO_INSTALL_DIR}/cmake`. This
creates the `PSACrypto::psacrypto` target.

You can then use it directly through `target_link_libraries()`:

    add_executable(xyz)

    target_link_libraries(xyz PUBLIC PSACrypto::psacrypto)

This will link the PSA-Crypto library to your library or application, and
add its include directories to your target (transitively, in the case of
`PUBLIC` or `INTERFACE` link libraries).

#### PSA-Crypto as a subproject

The PSA-Crypto repository supports being built as a CMake subproject. One can
use `add_subdirectory()` from a parent CMake project to include PSA-Crypto as a
subproject.


Example programs
----------------

We've included example programs for different features and uses in
[`programs/`](programs/README.md). Please note that the goal of these sample
programs is to demonstrate specific features of the library, and the code may
need to be adapted to build a real-world application.

Tests
-----

The PSA-Crypto repository includes an elaborate test suite in `tests/` that
initially requires Python to generate the tests files
(e.g. `test\_suite\_psa\_crypto.c`). These files are generated from a
`function file` (e.g. `suites/test\_suite\_psa\_crypto.function`) and a
`data file` (e.g. `suites/test\_suite\_psa\_crypto.data`). The `function file`
contains the test functions. The `data file` contains the test cases, specified
as parameters that will be passed to the test function.

License
-------

Unless specifically indicated otherwise in a file, PSA-Crypto files are
provided under the [Apache-2.0](https://spdx.org/licenses/Apache-2.0.html)
license. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for the full text of this license.
Contributors must accept that their contributions are made under the
Apache-2.0 license.
